Review comments from our local policy team.  Thank you for your consideration.
Dear Ms. Flowers, I have attached a comment letter on FAR CASE 2015-025.  Thanking you in advance.  Lynne W. Cook SVP Surety Early, Cassidy & Schilling, Inc.
Please see attached for comments from the American Wood Council.  
Please find attached UL comments with respect to the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council's proposed rule, Federal Acquisition Regulation: Sustainable Acquisition (FAR Case 2015-033).
Please see the attached comments on FAR Case 2015-024, submitted by Howard J. Feldman on behalf of the American Petroleum Institute.
Hello,  I work for DoD. Please have a US govt POC contact me asap.
This case is a gross misuse of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.  It has a substantial impact on all small business within the managed category, even if there is a limited impact on the larger vendor community.  Also it is not clear how this canot have a negative impact on various socioeconomic goals, as FSSI works against the individual small business. and creates  more administrative burden. Nor can many business afford more discounts on top of credit card fees.  This should not be implemented. 
The Administrative Procedures Act, codified in 5 U.S.C.  553(e), the public has the right to petition for the issuance, amendment, or repeal of a rule. Pursuant to that right, I ask that the General Services Administration implement a rule requiring all federal facilities under their management procure 100% of their electricity needs from carbon-neutral sources by 2035. Wherever possible, federal building managers should seek to install sustainable energy production, such as solar cells and wind power generation, within their facilities. Where local conditions prevent the acquisition of carbon-neutral power, the GSA shall be required to either manage their property portfolio in such a way as to offset 125% of the carbon emissions produced by electricity generation for federal facilities, or purchase carbon offsets on a regulated market of at least 125% of the carbon emissions produced by electricity generation for federal facilities.  While there are numerous justifications for such a rule, Ill focus on three: reducing the nations carbon emissions, promoting energy security, and reducing federal spending. First, a federal rule requiring the federal governments main property management agency to use exclusively carbon-neutral electricity would produce a direct reduction in the nations carbon emissions, but it would also send a strong signal to other power consumers of the United States commitment to reduce global climate change. By guaranteeing power utilities a consumer of carbon-neutral electricity, the rule makes it more likely that utilities will offer such an option, allowing other customers to also purchase electricity produced using carbon-neutral generation. Second, the rule would promote the energy security of vital federal offices. By reducing their dependence on grid electricity and encouraging local power production, the rule would make it less likely that a facility would be disrupted by a grid power outage. Third, this rule will produce savings for the American taxpayer. Without operational fuel costs, renewable energy offers the federal government price stability and savings. In the coming years, as the installation costs for wind, solar, and other alternative energy systems continue to fall, the economics of these systems will continue to improve, thus ensuring that this rule will reduce the nations power bill.  This rule would not be burdensome for federal building managers. By providing flexibility in terms of the means to generate carbon-neutral electricity, managers can utilize the most appropriate system based on geographic, atmospheric, structural, and aesthetic considerations. While installing rooftop solar panels is likely the simplest way a federal facility could comply with this proposed rule, it is far from the only option. In some locations, wind turbines may provide a better return on investment. In others, hydropower or geothermal power production may be appropriate. If implemented today, federal facilities would have just over six years to implement it. This timeframe should be adequate to allow administrators to install alternative energy generation in their facilities, or procure a carbon-neutral commercial power supply. Many utilities already offer customers the option to purchase power from carbon-neutral meansall evidence indicates that this will only become more prevalent in the coming years.  Additionally, the rule acknowledges that there may be federal facilities which are impossible to power using carbon-neutral generation systems. In that case, the GSA is directed to offset its carbon footprint using either active facility management, or on the carbon offset market. The GSA may choose techniques such as planting carbon-capturing trees and grasses on the properties it manages, or reducing the tailpipe emissions of its vehicle fleet, or promoting carpooling to work by its employees, to name just three possible options. This should not be a limited list  building managers should be empowered to think creatively about ways to offset carbon produced by the agency. If the GSA finds that it is unable to internally offset the carbon produced for electricity for its facilities, an option to purchase offsets is also provided, ensuring that the rule is able to be complied with, regardless of technology or facility management changes. Finally, the requirement that the GSA offset an additional 25% of carbon emissions provides a powerful incentive for facility managers to procure their electricity from carbon-neutral sources.  Nicholas Monck Co-Chair Colorado Democratic Party Energy and the Environment Initiative
This comment is submitted as a follow-up to my  previous comment FAR-2014-0025-0012, which was submitted on behalf of the veterans advocacy I do for the Fair Work for Vets non-profit cause.  After reviewing section 8116 of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act of 2010 which was cited in the Department of Labor's Regulatory Impact Analysis Pursuant to Executive Orders 12866 and 13563, I found that the DOD appropriations language provides a fix for the problems in the current proposed rule as noted in comment FAR-2014-0025-0012.    Comment FAR-2014-0025-0012 raises a concern that the language for FAR 22.2006 which has been proposed by the original rule changes is flawed because it does not cover contractors with multiple Federal contractors if those contracts do not individually amount to $1M in awards.  This flaw allows for a loop hole where large Federal contractors which have contracts exceeding a total of $1M can shift work which have led to claims under Federal law to a contract which does not meet the threshold for barring arbitration.  This loop hole would not be difficult to realize and would allow an unscrupulous Federal contractor to compel arbitration and deny an employee access to the Courts.    In addition to the loop hole created for future contracts, the current proposed language for FAR secion 22.2006 does not allow the protections for complainants to be extended to employees on existing contracts.  This flaw allows current employment agreements which require arbitration of discrimination claims to remain in force and can still be used by a contractor to deny an employee access to the Courts, even if that contractor has agreed not to compel arbitration on new contracts which meet the threshold.    In 2010, Congress passed legislation which codified the same protections against mandatory arbitration for employees making claims under Title VII and for claims involving sexual misconduct.  As noted in the DOL's Impact Analysis, the 2010 statutory language implements the same protections in DOD contracts for claims under Title VII and claims involving sexual misconduct that are proposed for non-DOD agencies in the original rule for FAR section 22.2006.  However, review of Section 8116 in the DOD appropriation language finds that the implementing language for the anti-discrimination protections for DOD do not suffer from the flaw in the current proposed rule change for FAR section 22.2006.  Proposed Changes:  proposed changes to the language for FAR section 22.2006 are shown in the attached document.  The proposed changes cure the problems with the original proposed changes to FAR section 22.2006 because they: 1) Require all contractors awarded with contracts >$1M to agree not to compel arbitration on all contracts, including those less than $1M; and 2) Require all contractors who accept new business with the Federal government to agree to forgo arbitration on complaints arising from work on existing or past contracts which had employment agreements requiring arbitration.  The above proposed changes serve as an alternative change to the changes proposed in my previous comment FAR-2014-0025-0012.  If the changes proposed herewith are adopted, no further consideration of comment FAR-2014-0025-0012 is required.  However, if the changes proposed herewith are not adopted, please continue to consider the changes proposed in FAR-2014-0025-0012.
Please see attachment for EmeSec Incorporated's comments in opposition to the proposed FAR rule titled "Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces" published in the Federal Register on May 28,2015. 
It is unclear what problem, if any, this is trying to solve other than creating a regulatory entry in the FAR that codifies a policy that DoD, Coast Guard, and NASA wish to implement.  The question is, "Why implement this change? What problem are we trying to solve?"    This change will increase the burden on Contracting Officers in obtaining certified cost or pricing data and conducting additional proposal analysis and will impact procurement action lead time (PALT) estimates to award contracts that were solicited competitively but had only one bid/proposal response. DoD Contracting Officers are already required to re-solicit competitive actions resulting in only one offer for an additional 30 days by DFARS 215.371-2.  This is after feedback is obtained from interested parties (DFARS PGI 215.371-2) and the requirement discussed and revised with the program office (DFARS 215.371-2 (a)(1)), which all takes time.  Additionally, in situations where only one offer was received in a competitive solicitation and the Contracting Officer wishes to determine that adequate price competition existed they already are required to have that determination approved by one level above their position in accordance with DFARS 215.371-3(a).    This hot topic seems to resurface every couple years, adding some additional burden for Contracting Officers at DoD, Coast Guard, and NASA.  This is already a very heavily regulated topic in procurement, and it seems we keep adding regulation on top of regulation to address an issue that still seems to be unresolved.  At the very least, this change will add further restrictions to allowing the Contracting Officer "wide latitude to exercise business judgment" as cited in FAR 1.602-2.  This change is yet one more effort to reduce the Contracting Officer's ability to do just that and I urge reconsideration of this regulation until the actual problem can be identified and targeted with an expected outcome that provides an acceptable solution.  We need to trust our Contracting Officer's ability to make these decisions and if there is a problem with that, additional regulation should be focused on the training and appointment of Contracting Officers Government-wide. 
Submit comments in response to FAR case 2015-038 to http://www.regulations.gov. Submit comments via the Federal eRulemaking portal by entering "FAR Case 2015-038". Select the link "Comment Now" that corresponds with "FAR Case 2015-038." Follow the instructions provided on the screen. Please include your name, company name (if any), and "FAR Case 2015-038" on your attached document. If your comment cannot be submitted using https://www.regulations.gov, call or email the points of contact in the FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT section of this document for alternate instructions.
Why are we still importing oil and gas ??  Energy dept date  7/31/2017  shows we are importing oil products from many countries;   import in April 2017  was 307,314 thousand barrels then increased to 329,468  thousand barrels in month of May.  One of the noticeable was from Russia april import 9,231 thousand  barrels, then in May 2017  increased to 12,425  thousand barrels, Why are we hurting American Energy industry ?  Mexico  went from april import of 20,392 thousand barrels to 25,100 barrels in May 2017, why are we hurting American with regulations. 
See attached file(s) RE: OMB Control 9000-0001, Affidavit of Individual Surety, SF 28
High Level Recommendations  I am submitting the following comments and feedback to FAR Case 2015-015 starting with high level recommendations and followed with detailed comment.  Maintain existing FSSI programs and place a temporary hold on the implementation of all other pending and future FSSI programs.  The Federal Acquisition Service (FAS) official Tiffany Hixson, on August 2, 2016, said, Weve [FAS] spent the better part of last year opening up the Gateway to industry, she said, and we have probably not zero, but almost zero, feedback from industry. In that the government has publicly stated that the strategy and implementation of the FSSI program / strategic sourcing / category management is being performed absent industry feedback, its clear that the FSSI program should be put on temporary hold until industry feedback is obtained.  Develop a complete cost-benefit analysis that takes both sides of the value chain / supply chain into account (Government and Industry). This analysis should be outsourced to a third party that specializes in strategic sourcing; a senior consultancy that is not partial to either side.  The cost-benefit analysis should take into account, not limited to, government cost efficiencies, procurement streamlining, administrative analysis, industry / vendor zone and geographical impact, job loss, and company impact.  The cost-benefit analysis should also take into account the metrics, processes, and lessons-learned by the states of California and Pennsylvania. Both CA and PA implemented state-wide strategic sourcing programs. Both states terminated their programs for multiple reasons, including a failure to conduct a complete cost-benefit analysis prior to implementation and an on-going cost-benefit analysis to ensure the program balanced state and industry value.  Before updating the FAR, the government has an obligation to ensure that there is a balance between government and industry. Clearly, based on the fact that were talking tax payer dollars, the scale cannot and should not be balanced equally. Current implementation of FSSI shows little if any balance for industry and the small business community. For example, we have some level of government data on FSSI OS2/OS3 (office supplies) and no data yet on JanSan which has been awarded but not yet implemented. JanSan spend will be at least twice that of OS2/OS3 and were still only looking at less than one percent of total government appropriations. Now is the time to balance FSSI before thousands of other small companies are impacted like the majority of small businesses that were impacted by OS2/OS3. Website Builder
By implementing policy, the FAR must clearly present how standards, programs, Ecolabels and certifications are to be used in the acquisition process.   As a Federal Government vendor, we see solicitations that are confusing and not adequately addressing agencies' environmental performance or sustainability.   Without a clear rationale, Federal customers are using specific certifications as a requirement to exclude from competition products that carry a different certification from a certification organization other than US EPA Safer Choice.   It is our opinion that without a supporting rationale, third party certifications approved by the EPA should be considered equivalent to third party certifications. The EPA site is also unclear in its guidance and seems to present EPA programs over other third party assurance programs.  In addition to Federal procurement, this is impacting state, local and private sector purchasing requirements. The Executive Order 13693 doesn't state a certification or assurance preference.  In order for us to be responsive (as a vendor) we pursue and work collaboratively with both EPA Safer Choice and other science based third party certifiers such as Green Seal.  It would be a duplication of effort (administrative burden onto our processes) to seek multiple equivalent validations for a single product.   Federal Government sustainability objectives (and others) would be better served if the EPA did not compete with third party certifiers.  The confusion precludes effective implementation of sustainability objectives and can be expected to result in higher costs for both government and non-government customers.  Proposed FAR language change:  Sustainable products and services means products and services, including construction, that  "2. Are identified by EPA programs and provide information on how and when they can be applied at: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-01/documents/epa_recommendations_of_specifications_standards_and_ecolabels1-3-16.pdf"  
Please ensure that this new requirement takes into consideration the requirements found in Part 36 of the FAR which address performance of work by prime construciton contractors.  The FAR states that Part 36 supercedes and  specifically states in 36.501 that minimum performance by the contractor is (1) "as high as the contracting officer considers appropriate for the project..." and (2) "ordinarily not less than 12 % unless a greater percentage is rquired by law or agency requirement..."  so as not to conflict.  Also, Limitation on Subcontracting Clause found at 52.219-14 which is used in small business set aside type procurements outlines specific percentages for small businesses to comply with - namely, 50% for service and manufacturing and 15% for general construcition/25% for specialty construction, which could also conflict with the new FAR  15 citation proposed.
The DEA Financial Policy & Controls Unit considers the requirement for contractors to prepare a justification whenever a higher actual expense reimbursement method is used over the per diem rates to be necessary and helpful.  We feel that FAR 31.205 applies the same standard that is applicable to Federal employees under the Federal Travel Regulations, and that the burden on contractors is fair considering exceeding per diem requires authorization for Federal travelers as well. In summary, the FAR rule should remain as-is. Contractors should be held to the same standard as Federal travelers with regard to travel cost limitations and authorizations.    
I believe, that although as a Contracting Officer the rule would make our jobs easier, but it discriminates the one group we are supposed to support most; the Small Business Owner. For this reason, I disagree with the proposed rule change.  Thank you, James Sowden | Contract Program Manager Rural Development United States Department of Agriculture  
This proposed rule is going to hurt more small businesses than it is going to help. FSSI will significantly limit the number of small businesses doing business with the government. 
The Notice says, "Section 5 of the International Air Transportation Fair Competitive Practices Act of 1974 (49 U.S.C. 1517) (Fly America Act) requires that all Federal agencies and Government contractors and subcontractors at FAR 47.402, use U.S.-flag air carriers for U.S. Government-financed international air transportation of personnel (and their personal effects) or property, to the extent that service by those carriers is available."  This is incorrect.  The statute is no longer 49 U.S.C. 1517 but 49 U.S.C. 40118, and it does not impose any requirements on contractors and subcontractors.   
The subcontractor reporting requirement would be a major burden, requiring significant investment into systems and people resources. Medtronic advocates that this requirement apply only to prime contractors with the majority of its annual gross revenues in Federal awards.  Given that several contracts contain confidentiality provisions that would restrict the release of responsive information, and the reporting obligation at the $25,000 threshold starts in 2011, this would put an additonal onerous burden of renegotiating contracts on the contracting parties.
Comments on FAR Case 2008-039:  The Government intends to implement the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act for all Government contracts over $25k through the new FAR Clause 52.204-10. This implementation will place a heavy burden on, and increase costs to, all contractors and subcontractors to the Federal Government. These additional costs will be passed on to the Government through direct and/or indirect costs in future proposals and their resulting contracts, raising the cost of these goods and services to both the Government and the taxpayer.   The Transparency Act mandated a free, public website containing full disclosure of all Federal contract award information. With the government’s annual projected costs for just reporting data to the website at over $21M, this website will not be free to the taxpayer. And, since this cost does not include the collection costs for all data for all subcontracts over $25K, which will be considerably higher for all affected contractors (and passed on to the Government in higher direct and/or indirect rates), as new processes will need to be implemented to collect, track, store, and report this data, nor does it include the Government’s cost to maintain the website, the bill to the taxpayer will be considerably higher than this $21M figure. And with this high price tag, the anticipated benefit to the average taxpayer will be, arguably, zero, as the average taxpayer will never visit or use this website. This website will be funded by the taxpayer and used by others to create statistics to support their various positions regarding Government procurement.   If this rule must be implemented, most of the additional costs incurred by the taxpayer could be saved by altering the proposed rule in many ways, including: 1)Exempt all Commercial Item (FAR Part 12) and COTS purchases – These purchases are based on commercial practices and commercial, market-driven prices. The same rationale for their exemption to FAR Part 15 requirements should be applied here. It can certainly be argued that reporting a purchase of a pick-up truck or other supplies normally purchased by the public was not the intent of the Act. The creation of these classes of purchases was based on the idea of less government regulation and the implementation of this reporting seems to be in direct conflict with this founding premise. 2)Raise the threshold to a more reasonable level – The $25k threshold for purchases will cover almost all activity occurring at the prime and first-tier levels. Using a reasonable approach and applying typical statistical models, the Government could report 80% of all contract activity by selecting only 20% of the largest contracts. This methodology can meet the intent of transparency for the bulk of dollars spent, but without the high cost and burden of reporting all purchases. 3)Eliminate the reporting of 5 highly compensated officers – If the Government awards a contract to a prime contractor, this award would generally be based on either competitive means or best value. Either of these means should eliminate the need for identifying the salary of its officers, as this is part of the competitive cost structure and of no relevance to the price paid by the taxpayer. The need for this data to be made public, which is only required for those entities that do not already report such data to the SEC, is objectionable, at best.  Unless the contract is a sole-source, cost-type contract in which the Government will be obliged to pay the full salary of the company’s officers, this information should be protected, as the only reason to publicly display it on a web-site is to appease the curious spectator. 4)Add an exemption for competitively awarded, Firm-Fixed Price contracts – If contracts are competitively awarded on a firm-fixed price basis, the need for transparency is eliminated. Further reporting of these awards and their first-tier competitively awarded subcontracts simply adds no value to the taxpayer. 5)Add an exemption for small businesses – The Government has established Small Business as a special sector of business that needs special attention and nurturing to assist in its growth. Implementing these reporting criteria may especially impact these small businesses, adding costs to their structure and adding extra burden to them and their prime contractors in collecting and reporting information, including salary information, as most small businesses would not be exempt from that part of these reporting requirements.  These small businesses would be particularly sensitive to reporting such salary data in the proposed public forum. 6)Clarify that only the allowable portion of the officer’s salaries must be reported – If officer’s salaries must be reported, the reported data should be limited to the allowable portion of those salaries. If a company pays its executives at a competitive rate, but disallows a portion of that salary and benefits in its indirect rate structure, the Government never pays for this portion of these executives’ salaries. As such, reporting the full salary is misleading, as it would lead the viewer to believe that the Government was paying the entire salary. As the Government already disallows certain costs and caps others, reporting of the entire salary and benefits would also conflict with existing Government policies. Finally, all of these salaries are audited by DCAA personnel and are required to be within the mandated Government maximum allowable amounts.  In summary, this proposed rule is over-reaching and creates a heavy burden on the Government’s prime and first-tier contractors. This burden may lead some contractors, particularly commercial and small business contractors, to re-assess the value of dealing with the Government, leaving this sector and, in doing so, eliminating some of the current competition.  Please consider the comments above in determining the cost-benefit of implementing any final rule.
Mr. Edward Chambers  Procurement Analyst  General Services Administration  Regulatory Secretariat  1800 F Street, NW  Washington, DC 20405  Re: FAR 2005-75, FAR Case 2014-012, Federal Acquisition Regulation; Limitation on Allowable Government Contractor Compensation Costs, 79 FR 35865 (June 24, 2014)  Dear Mr. Chambers:  On behalf of the American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE), AFL-CIO, which represents more than 650,000 federal employees who serve the American people across the nation and around the world, we are pleased to submit these comments on the referenced Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) case.  AFGE strongly supports the interim rule which limits allowable contractor compensation costs to $487,000 per annum. We particularly applaud the FAR issuing agencies for meeting the statutory deadline for issuance of the interim rule, and take this as a sign of the importance that you attach to the new statutory restrictionSec. 702 of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 (Pub. L. 113-67), which limits contractor compensation costs on covered contracts.  AFGE has only one specific issue with the rule, and this relates to proper implementation for the purposes of cost analyses when pricing fixed-price contracts.  It is well understood that the FAR cost principles apply whenever a contract clause requires the determination of the allowability of costs in the administration of contracts, as would typically be the case for cost-reimbursement and other flexibly-priced contracts. See FAR 31.000(a). However, FAR 31.102 requires that the cost principles also be applied by the government contracting officer when pricing fixed-price contracts "... whenever... cost analysis is performed ..." See also FAR 31.000(a).  Further, FAR 15.404-l(c)(l) defines "cost analysis" as "... the review and evaluation of any separate cost elements and profit or fee in an offer's or contractor's proposal, as needed to determine a fair and reasonable price or to determine cost realism ..." The FAR does not distinguish between "certified cost or pricing data" and "data other than certified cost or pricing data" for the purposes of conducting a cost analysis. Either type of data are subject to the same rules insofar as cost analysis is concerned.  In other words, whenever the analysis of underlying cost data is conducted on a fixed- price contract proposalwhether the data are "certified" or "uncertified"the contracting officer shall use the cost principles in performing this analysis.  Given the important public policy considerations inherent in the interim rule, fixed-price contracts should not escape scrutiny merely because a contract clause requiring contractor compliance is not included in the resulting contract. In fact, existing FAR rules (31.102) make perfectly clear that the cost principles must be applied for pricing purposes when cost analysis techniques are utilized.  Accordingly, although the interim rule is only a modification to FAR 31.205-6{p), the importance of the application of the revised rule must be broadly applied as intended by the drafters of FAR Part 31, "Contract Cost Principles and Procedures". Accordingly, AFGE respectfully requests that the FAR issuing agencies include specific preamble language in the final rule addressing this point, as well as unequivocal language that reinforces the existing Part 31 language which specifies the application of the cost principles to fixed-price contracts whenever cost analysis is performed.  Congress has expressed a strong public policy preference for not allowing or recognizing certain costs, including excessive compensation costs, in performing federal contracts or subcontracts. Allowing fixed-price contracts that are subject to cost analysis to evade these restrictions not only defeats Congressional intent, but costs taxpayers significantly.  Again, AFGE appreciates the prompt attention of FAR issuing agencies to the interim rule, and we look forward to our concerns being satisfactorily addressed in the final rule. Please do not hesitate to let me know if you have any questions.  Sincerely,   J. David Cox, Sr. National President  
In general, I think the proposed rule is appropriate and necessary.  However, I would suggest that consideration be given for an exception to the proposed rule change as it pertains to newly formed JV's as a direct result of a procurement opportunity. The  procurement/proposal duration may not be sufficient to accommodate the SAM registration process to be completed, prior to the JV's submission date.  A necessary part of any JV agreement is the specific solicitation number, which is often unknown until the solicitation is published.  Possible options for consideration could be:  Require proof of submission for SAM registration as of the date of offer. Require proof/verification that each JV entity have an active SAM registration at time of proposal
All Kaspersky products should be removed from use effective immediately and with no loopholes.  While it is difficult to see what you are proposing here, this looks like a loophole which would allow continued use for 6 months of these products, which will facilitate election and other tampering by Russia:  "If modifying an existing contract to extend the period of performance by more than 6 months, contracting officers should include the clause in accordance with 1.108(d)."  What if the period is 5.5 months, for instance?  This would carry us from July 18th to mid December, whereas the risk is now!  
See attached FAR Case 2009-024 Transmittal with late comments.
As a HUBZone small business, we are in favor of revising the rule to apply HUBZone sole-source authority to acquisitions at or below the Simplified Acquisition Threshold. We suggest federal agencies more frequently include HUBZone small business set-aside contracts to contract with HUBZone small businesses.
Please see attached letter dated March 12, 2013 to Ms. Deborah Lague, GSA, from Reuben A. Guttman with Grant & Eisenhofer P.A. commenting on E.O. 13627.
Louisiana Association for the Blind, one of Louisiana's largest employers of people with visual impairment, is opposed to the proposed language that essentially creates a "FSSI only" situation, undermining the efficiency and effectiveness of 151 Base Supply Centers on our nation's military posts.  The attached letter details our objection to the proposed language and includes the remedy sought.
Dear Sir or Madam:  Please find attached the comments of the International Labor Recruitment Working Group, a coalition of migration, labor, and anti-trafficking organizations and academics seeking to end the systemic abuse of international workers by collaborating across sectors. The Working Group is deeply concerned about the myriad forms of recruitment fees and how the use of such fees by recruiters, employers, and in some cases governments is increasingly making workers vulnerable to abuses and human trafficking.   In summary, the Working Group commends DoD, GSA, and NASA for jointly promulgating this much-needed comprehensive definition of prohibited recruitment fees.  We believe the Proposed Rule, FAR Case 2015-017, will go a long way towards addressing the numerous problems caused by the use of recruitment fees.  In the attached comments, we provide further analysis and recommendations for strengthening the definition.    Thank you for reviewing our comments.  We will be pleased to answer any questions you may have.  Sincerely,  Rachel Micah-Jones, Chair International Labor Recruitment Working Group
The Green Blue Institute supports  Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) Case 2015-033 on Sustainable Acquisition as written to implement Executive Order 13693.    Based on recent news reports about the Trump Administration's budget priorities and its desire to cut EPA's budget by 31%, eliminating numerous EPA programs, the GreenBlue Institute is concerned about the future of the Safer Choice program. Safer Choice has demonstrated how a non-regulatory, voluntary program can effectively address consumer concerns about chemicals used in products they use everyday. Consumers trust the Safer Choice label because it is a U.S. government agency charged with protecting the health and safety of Americans and our environment. Consumers also see the EPA as an impartial arbiter, capable of managing and overseeing the program without conflicts of interest that would be inherent if the program were to be managed by the private sector. Businesses have invested in the Safer Choice label because like their customers, they, too, trust EPA to be an impartial, financially un-conflicted stakeholder.   The Safer Choice program has also been successful in working with chemical companies and product formulators to advance the field of green chemistry. Over 500 companies now make products carrying the Safer Choice label, diversifying their product offerings as well as their revenue streams. Formulators and their ingredient suppliers have welcomed the clarity and standardization around product formulation claims that Safer Choice provides the market.   EPA is uniquely qualified to manage the Safer Choice program. Design for Environment staff originated the program and provide scientific and technical expertise on a daily basis. They are also able to leverage significant data and scientific expertise available from other EPA offices, something that other standards cannot offer the market.   James Ewell Director, Sustainable Materials GreenBlue Institute
FAC 2005-32, FAR Case 2009-10 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of  2009 (the Recovery Act) - Publicizing Contract Actions  Following are comments on FAR Case 2009-010 1.  In the instructions regarding the applicability date, recommend adding  modifications to this sentence as follows: “This rule applies on or after the effective  date of this rule to: (1) Solicitations issued, (2) contracts awarded, and (3) orders  issued under existing task and delivery order contracts, and (4) any monetary  modifications as defined in the rule.”  2.  Recommend revising FAR 5.704(a)(2) to clearly indicate that modifications to  task and delivery orders of $25,000 or more also require publication in fedbizopps.   This could be achieved by revising 5.704(a)(2) to read as follows:  “In addition,  notices of proposed contract actions are required for orders and modifications of  orders of $25,000 or more, funded in whole or in part by the Recovery Act, which  are issued under task or delivery order contracts.”    3.  The new rule is silent on section 5.205 Special situations. There is no  discussion on posting special notices on R&D, AE, OMB Circular A-76, and 8 (a).  Guidance is needed in this area considering that a portion of ARRA funding should  be awarded to American Indians, which comprise the largest percentage of 8(a)  firms.  
e verify should be mandatory for all employers!  the quicker this is done the  better,  the system seems to work fairly well and is simple to use.  this would be a  great help to our nation.  thank you
WE are deeply concerned with the precipitous and illegal presidential mandate to  require the enforcement of E-Verify for federal contractors.  The system is  notoriously flawed and would be a waste of money and time to implement while, at  the same time, costing documented workers and citizens their jobs.
To Whom It May Concern:  I write to oppose the proposed executive order to require the use of E-Verify to  document the residency staus of all federal contract workers.  Both the  Department of Homeland Security and the Office of Governmental Affairs have  testified that this system is seriously flawed.  Significant numbers of citizens and  permanent residents will suffer harm due to erroneous labelling as "not verified to  work".  Foreign-born workers and those with Hispanic names are most often  falsely identified.  This could be cause for claims of prejudice if the US  Government goes forward and uses a system that is known to be inadequate and  flawed.    Already many employers use E-Verify illegally as a pre-employment screen or  dismiss employees preemtorily without due process.  Current law states that this  system should be voluntary and may not be used as a pre-employment screen.  To make it a requirement for federal contract workers breaks current law.  In other  words, this is illegal.   When the US Government flaunts its own laws, it  undermines respect for law throughout society.    Better results could be had by addressing the inadequacies of the total US  immigration policy by expanding the number of visas allocated for both skilled and  unskilled workers, esp. those from Central and South America.  A legal path to  citizenship is urgently needed for the millions of people currently working in the  country and from whom we all benefit.    Sincerely, Sister Gemma Doll Coordinator of Cultural Formation Diocese of Dodge City  620-227-1542
I oppose these regulations.  We need a comprehensive fix to immigration issues, not a pandering  to anti-immigrant sentiments.
WE TOTALLY SUPPORT THE E-VERIFY PLAN  This will be a MAJOR step in the "self-deportation" of illegals.....if there's no work  or benefits, they will go home on their own....
RE:  FAR-2019-0003 FRN 2019-15370 OMB 9000-0060 Accident Prevention Plans  The uniform acquisition policies and procedures found in the Federal Acquisition Regulation for use by all executive agencies includes a contract clause in 48 CFR 52.236.13 for use in fixed-price construction or demolition contracts.   It incorporates by reference the required use of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Safety and Health Requirements Manual which is a more than 1000 page document used as a way for the government to show compliance with 29 CFR Part 1926 and 1910 which are the U.S. Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration workplace safety rules for construction.  Safety on the jobsite is always important.  Strict adherence to applicable safety regulations combined with general job specific knowledge by workers has been demonstrated to help reduce the frequency and severity of workplace accidents.  The contracts and regulation manuals are voluminous documents that are not readily understood in full by many contracting officers and contract employees.  This could be enhanced by ensuring in contract language referencing this requirement that mutli-employer worksite policies be included.  This would relieve the current ambiguity whether subcontractor personnel as well as the prime contractors personnel are subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation.  The Regulatory Secretariat Division should review the revision including notations above and approve this information collection requirement regarding accident prevention plans as it is beneficial for the protection of the public.  
The proposed changes to FAR subpart 2.1, FAR 19.000(b), and FAR 19.301 ignore that many contracts awarded outside of the U.S. (for performance outside the U.S.) are awarded to entities considered to be Foreign Owned Businesses not Incorporated in the U.S., Foreign Owned Businesses Incorporated in the U.S., and Other Foreign Entities.   These types of entities are automatically considered "other than small business" because SBA cannot determine their business size standards and they are not eligible for socioeconomic categories. The System for Award Management (SAM) displays these types of foreign entities as "other than small", even though many would normally be considered small. Therefore Contracting Officers/Contract Specialists/Purchasing Agents report foreign entities in Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS) as "other than small" upon reporting contract awards because that's what the information in SAM shows.   The data used to support this FAR proposed rule change is largely based on data from SAM and FPDS on contract award for performance overseas, but the data by default shows all foreign entities as "other than small".    I'm also curious as to how this would impact the DoD requirement at DFARS 219.201. Would DoD agencies outside of the U.S. have to start using DD Form 2579 - Small Business Coordination Record? There's a lot that is unclear in these proposed rule changes and much more detail is needed. The changes seem to really only benefit U.S. owned small businesses and it would absolutely create confusion for government agencies overseas. These changes would also drive up prices and negatively impact the U.S. taxpayer. Foreign owned entities will almost always have better pricing for contracts which performance is overseas versus U.S. owned small businesses. There's no valid reason to implement these unclear rule changes and the data that supports the changes is skewed. Let's not fix what isn't broken.      
Nothing enrages President Trump more than female journalists that dare to question him. So naturally he blew a gasket in his 60 Minutes interview with Lesley Stahl.  Stahl: Are you ready for some tough questions? Trump: You're going to be fair. Stahl: Are you sure I'm going to be fair? Trump: Just be fair. Stahl: But last time I remember you saying to me, "Bring it on. Bring it on here." Trump: No, I'm not looking for that. I'm looking for fairness. That's all. Stahl: You're going to get fairness. Trump: Yeah. Stahl: But you're okay with some tough questions? Trump: No, I'm not.  "No, I'm not" is right up there with "I don't take responsibility at all" as a universal answer.  America: Are you ready to lead this country? Donald Trump: No, I'm not.
See attached file(s) don't know what to say really I have evidence to back up what I am talking about and what happened that night at the store
Please see the attached comments submitted by Internet Association.
I TOLD YOUSSS THEY COMING FOR ME I DIDNT DO THAT YOUSS DID ON FACEBOOK REMEMEBER I NEED A LAWYER TO READ THIS STUFF HELP ME PLEASE I APPREICATE YOU MAKING IT EASIER TO COMMENT ON THEM. THANK YOU FOR THAT.
Disclaimer: I submit the following comments in response to the proposed rule captioned above. I have worked with Government construction acquisitions for more than 18 years, but I am commenting in my personal capacity. My comments do not represent the views of  of any federal agency.  Construction activities have the potential to create complex causal relationships that can require extensive fact-gathering and intensive impact analysis. Each situation is unique and independent of the next, so historical data is not relevant to predicting future timeframes. It is not uncommon for resolving an REA to involve iterative exchanges between the Government and the contractor to obtain necessary information.  The timeliness of definitizing an REA is directly impacted by factors beyond the Governments control, including contractor cooperation and fact-specific complexities of each request. The proposed FAR amendment would require agencies to disclose historic data on time for resolving requests for equitable adjustment without explanation or context about contributing factors outside the parties' control. The proposed rule should account for each unique context, otherwise the data is meaningless.  
Submit comments in response to FAR case 2015-038 to http://www.regulations.gov. Submit comments via the Federal eRulemaking portal by entering “FAR Case 2015-038”. Select the link “Comment Now” that corresponds with “FAR Case 2015-038.” Follow the instructions provided on the screen. Please include your name, company name (if any), and “FAR Case 2015-038” on your attached document. If your comment cannot be submitted using https://www.regulations.gov, call or email the points of contact in the FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT section of this document for alternate instructions.
MCAA requests that GSA withdraw the above-captioned regulatory guidance, and then re-propose new guidance that is both consistent with existing agency recommendations and the mandate of the legislative proscription on reverse auctions in construction procurement under HR 133, Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, Title IV Construction Consensus Procurement Improvement Act of 2020.  See attached file for comments.
The requirement under the proposed section 17.802(d)(5) that contracting officers only use the services of a reverse auction service provider that at the close of each auction "[r]emoves all documentation received from offerors in response to the reverse auction from its business and computer systems" could have the unintended effect of hindering investigations into unfair pricing systems. That's because certain contract information such as IP addresses, payments methods and emails containing metadata that could be used for audits and investigations into deceptive bidding practices would also be removed from providers system. This would be contrary to the spirit of what was intended by the Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) in its guidance.  The June 1, 2015 OFPP memo titled "Effective Use of Reverse Auctions" reviews "the benefits of reverse auctions, offers a set of reminders to help contracting offices maximize the value of this tool, and asks agencies to work with OFPP in identifying and collecting data that can be used to evaluate and improve results." (GAO's December 2013 report on reverse auctions highlighted the growing trend in using the tool and called on OFPP to issue comprehensive government-wide guidance.)  One of the issues OFPP said contracting officers should consider to help optimize the results achieved from reverse auctions is whether the agency is "capturing and reviewing data from prior reverse auctions." Such data, OFPP stated, "can help agencies formulate more accurate government cost estimates, which, in turn, helps to ensure fair and reasonable pricing." Instead of the proposed FAR language that could have the unintended effect of hindering investigations into unfair pricing/bidding and hinder the ability of agencies to protect themselves against entities that engage in deceptive bidding practices, I recommend that section 17.802(d)(5) be modified as set forth in the attachment.  Alternatively, the word "documentation" can be defined in this section of the FAR to include the kind of information described above: bids packages, IP addresses, payments methods and emails that contain metadata so that this information is transferred to the Government before it is removed from the service providers' business and computer systems.  Thank you for the opportunity to comment.
FAR Case 2015-038  The current proposed FAR changes in section 17.802(d) (5) (together with a proposed contract clause in Section 52.217-ZZ (b) (5)(iii)), requires that government procurement officials only use reverse-auction service providers that, among other things, "at the close of each auction . . . removes all documentation received from offerors in response to the reverse auction from its business and computer systems . . ."   We are concerned about the data destruction policy imposed on reverse auctioneers. The data received and housed by the service providers is essential to conventional investigations and in the use of data analytics. The data mentioned for removal is used by investigators to piece together critical elements of fraudulent activity. For instance, exact time and date of submissions, email addresses, user profile information, and details such as pricing and rates. This information provides evidence that may be used in interviews and other investigative techniques to prove or disprove allegations. It can also be used in legal proceedings such as search warrants and subpoenas. Data analytics leverages the same data across a large volume in order to predict, identify and head-off illegal activities. Removing the data deprives the OIG in its efforts to deter fraud, waste and abuse.  While the proposed provisions mention that information and documentation will be provided by the auctioneer for the benefit of the government's contract file, there is no mention that such data will be retained in its original electronic format, including metadata.    NASA Office of Inspector General
Please call me with further information...regarding this situatiin. Thank you!? Sincerely,Katherine Castleberry.
Please see the Zero Emission Transportation Association's attached public comment in reference to FAR Case 2021-008.
Everyone deserves a living wage, federal contractors included! I support this proposed wage floor and think it should be inflation indexed as well. 
I think the intent is that 120 days before the fifth year or exercising an option, we should have already checked to see if the contractor is still in the 8(a) program.  This reads like we have to wait until the 120 day mark and then check it some before taking the action.  It would make more sense if it said "no less than 120 days prior"
In the event a contractor is not 8(a) eligible prior to exercising the fifth (5) option year, 120 days does not give an agency enough time to re-procure.  For instance a Base Operating Support Contract takes a minimum of 12 months to re-procure, typically 18 to 24 months is needed for a large one.  What would be the agencies option; does the SBA have the authority to allow one more year to re-procure?   Could an 8(a) contractor that did not receive the award protest after the fifth (5) option year (in year six (6), seven (7), or eight (8)) if they suspect the winner has graduated?   Are current procurements grandfathered from this regulation?     
Regarding Part 19, small business determinations for contractors operating under Federal Supply Schedule (FSS) Multiple Award Schedule (MAS) should be determined as of the date of each response to individual requests for quotation (RFQ), rather than as of the date of the initial offer for the multiple-award contract.
I am submitting this comment on behalf of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Inc. 
SEBAC (Small Environmental Business Action Coalition), on behalf of over 50 small environmental businesses, supports the revisions to the FAR to implement laws enacted by Congress and regulations already enacted by the SBA. In particular, we have reviewed and support the changes to the following subparts:   9.1 Responsible Prospective Contractors 15.3 Source Selection 19.3 Determination of Small Business Status for Small Business Programs 19.8 Contracting with Small Business  In our view, these changes are long overdue. As the Background information provided in this proposed rule pointed out, there is a significant delay between (1) Congress passing laws, (2) the SBA enacting those laws into its regulations, and (3) the FAR council incorporating those regulations & statutes into the FAR. This delay and disconnect has a significant impact on the small business community because (1) we are responsible for complying with all three requirements, which are often at odds with one another, (2) it creates more work for small businesses because we have to educate and convince contracting officers to help bridge those gaps between the SBA regulations and FAR clauses in proposal requirements/submittals so that we are compliant with both, and (3) it results in more GAO and small business size status protests when the gaps are not bridged. As such, it is important to incorporate small business statutes and regulations into the FAR as quickly as possible. 
This regulation should clearly define what is considered "Use" as it pertains to personally owned equipment.  For example, should contractors have to take into account all networking equipment that is utilized in a work from home environment, such as ISP provided modem/routers or other personally owned networking devices?
